docs(react-sdk): participant view & call layout customization (#511)
GetStream/stream-video-js: packages/react-sdk/docusaurus/docs/React/06-ui-cookbook/14-layout-customization.mdx

---
id: layout-customization

> title: Customization of default call layouts and ParticipantView component

Author: Yes, this sucks, I agree, but just "Participant" does not accurately describe what this guide is about and I couldn't think of something shorter.

> title: Customization of default call layouts and ParticipantView component

Reviewer: hm, what's wrong with "Participant"? My takeaway from the guide was that it shows how you can customize the participant component inside the call layout

> title: Customization of default call layouts and ParticipantView component

Author: I guess when you say it like that... then it kind of does make sense. Then `ParticipantView customizations` could be good middleground?

> title: Customization of default call layouts and ParticipantView component

Reviewer: I think yes, it'd solve the ToC problem

`ParticipantView` comes by default with certain participant information displayed in the "box" - such as mute states of either video or audio, quality indicator, participant's name, reactions etc. which are displayed over the video element positioned absolutely (see picture). By utilizing the `ParticipantViewUI` prop, you can extend the `ParticipantView` component with custom UI elements specific to each participant. This allows you to tailor the visual representation of the participant based on your application's requirements and design.

<img src={ParticipantViewUIImage} alt="ParticipantViewUI elements" />

The `VideoPlaceholder` prop allows you to replace the default placeholder displayed over the video element when the video is not playing. This placeholder is positioned absolutely over the video element\*. It provides you with the flexibility to customize the placeholder's appearance and content according to your needs.

:::caution
\*your custom `VideoPlaceholder` component should be able to accept `style` prop coming from `ParticipantView` to allow for absolute positioning
:::

## Customization in SDK provided layout components (preferred way)

> We highly recommend using layout components provided by the SDK as modification of the `ParticipantViewUI` in these call layouts is a possiblity. You can follow [this guide](./13-custom-call-layout.mdx) to build your own call layout.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We highly recommend using layout components provided by the SDK as it is possible to modify the `ParticipantViewUI` in these call layouts. You can follow [this guide](./13-custom-call-layout.mdx) to build your own call layout.
```

> ### `PaginatedGridLayout`

Reviewer 2: Pretty sure it's planned to have that there but a short explanation for it would be awesome. :)

```tsx
import {
  PaginatedGridLayout,
  StreamVideo,
  StreamCall,
  type ParticipantViewUIProps,
  type VideoPlaceholderProps,
} from '@stream-io/video-react-sdk';

const CustomParticipantViewUI = ({ participant }: ParticipantViewUIProps) => {
  return (
    <div className="participant-name">{participant.name || participant.id}</div>
  );
};

const CustomVideoPlaceholder = ({
  participant,
  style,
}: VideoPlaceholderProps) => {
  return (
    <div className="video-placeholder" style={style}>
      <img src={participant.image} alt={participant.id} />
    </div>
  );
};

const App = ({ client, callId }) => {
  return (
    <StreamVideo client={client}>
      <StreamCall callId={callId}>
        <PaginatedGridLayout
          VideoPlaceholder={CustomVideoPlaceholder}
          ParticipantViewUI={CustomParticipantViewUI}
        />
      </StreamCall>
    </StreamVideo>
  );
};
```

### `SpeakerLayout`

> `SpeakerLayout` component allows you to tweak participant UI in the spotlight and in the scrollable bar independently.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `SpeakerLayout` component allows you to tweak participant UI in the spotlight and in the scrollable bar independently.
```

  type VideoPlaceholderProps,
} from '@stream-io/video-react-sdk';

const CustomParticipantViewUIBar = ({
  participant,
}: ParticipantViewUIProps) => {
  return (
    <div className="bar-participant-name">
      {participant.name || participant.id}
    </div>
  );
};

const CustomParticipantViewUISpotlight = ({
  participant,
}: ParticipantViewUIProps) => {
  return (
    <div className="spotlight-participant-name">
      {participant.name || participant.id}
    </div>
  );
};

const CustomVideoPlaceholder = ({
  participant,
  style,
}: VideoPlaceholderProps) => {
  return (
    <div className="video-placeholder" style={style}>
      <img src={participant.image} alt={participant.id} />
    </div>
  );
};

const App = ({ client, callId }) => {
  return (
    <StreamVideo client={client}>
      <StreamCall callId={callId}>
        <SpeakerLayout
          VideoPlaceholder={CustomVideoPlaceholder}
          ParticipantViewUIBar={CustomParticipantViewUIBar}
          ParticipantViewUISpotlight={CustomParticipantViewUISpotlight}
        />
      </StreamCall>
    </StreamVideo>
  );
};
```

## Standalone `ParticipantView` customization (in custom call layouts)

> `ParticipantViewUI` prop accepts three possible values:
> 
> - `ReactElement` - find out what's considered a ReactElement in the [React documentation](https://react.dev/reference/react/isValidElement)
> - component which accepts `participant` as prop (use type `ParticipantViewUIProps`)
> - `null` if you wish to not render any UI
> 
> Following example shows utilization of `ParticipantViewUI` prop by passing down `ReactElement`:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `ParticipantViewUI` property accepts three possible values:

- `ReactElement` - find out what's considered a ReactElement in the [React documentation](https://react.dev/reference/react/isValidElement)
- component which accepts `participant` as a prop (use type `ParticipantViewUIProps`)
- `null` if you wish to not render any UI

The following example shows the utilization of the `ParticipantViewUI` prop by passing down `ReactElement`:
```
